2. What is OOP? List OOP concept ?

OOP - OOP is 'OBJECT ORIENTED PROGRAMMING', Any of programming language are done by is special characteristics and special function but in cpp is object oriented.
in object oriented programming language mesure function is reusability and over all in program class and object are functional way to given program,
in this programs classes and objects are using to program get program are more functional & problem solving,modularity,scalability,security.
object are self contained to also its facilliates troubleshooting while developing a program.
its promotes codes modularity,reusability,ancapsulation, and abstraction. 

"The main aim of being cpp born defined as an efficent and flexible language 
similar to c that also provided high-level features for program organization.


oops concepts:class,object:=-

class :
It is specified as a blueprint that describe the behaviors/states for an object.
Its is user defined datatype.
class consist of data members and members function, which can be accessed depending on the access specifier.the object of the class hold separate copies of data members. 
Its is possible to create as many objects of a class  as required.

syntax:
class className{
    access modifier:
    data member;
    access modifier:
    member function(){
        body of function.
    }
};

Object:                                                             
An Object can be defined as an entity that has a state and behavior, or in other words, anything that exists physically in the world is called an object. It can represent a dog, a person, a table, etc. An object means a combination of data and programs, which further represent an entity.
syntax: 
className object _name;
in this we can protect our data by using access specifier/modifier.

3 types they are:-
1.public: you can used public data any where in the program.
2.private: you can't the data directly in other class or function for that you need get and set function to use it
3.protected :it can be used in the child class only.

Data abstraction & encapsulation -  data abstraction is process that hides data 
,complex implementation details & code to make code to easier to read & secure.
data encapsulation is proceass that hides data and controls code visibility to protect 
data integrity.

polymorphism - The ability to extend in many forms are known as polymorphism.
the ability to perform the same action in multiple ways, using the
 same functions or operators repeatedly.

inheritance - a method through which one class inherits the properties from 
its parent class. inheritance is feature in which one new class is derived 
from the existing ones.

constructor - called by the compiler when an object is created, constructor 
allocate memory & initialize the class data members.

distructor - called by the compiler when an object is destroyed,destructors
deallocate object's memory & perform other cleanup.

Dynamic binding - the process where the method call is resolved at runtime
rather than compile time.










































