1.Introduction to dictionaries: key-value pairs.
A dictionary in Python is a collection of key-value pairs, where each key is unique, and each key is associated with a specific value.
You can think of it like a real-world dictionary, where you look up a word (the key) to find its meaning (the value).
You create a dictionary by using curly braces {} and separating the keys and values with a colon :. The key-value pairs are separated by commas.
my_dict = {
    "name": "Alice",  
    "age": 25,       
    "city": "New York" 
}
Adding or Updating Key-Value Pairs: You can add a new key-value pair or update an existing one.
Removing Key-Value Pairs: You can remove key-value pairs using the del keyword or pop() method.
A dictionary is a collection of key-value pairs.
Each key must be unique, and it maps to a specific value.
You can add, update, and remove key-value pairs in a dictionary

2.Accessing, adding, updating, and deleting dictionary elements
Accessing dictionary elements: You can access a dictionary element by its key.
Adding dictionary elements: You can add a new key-value pair to a dictionary using the assignment operator (=
Updating dictionary elements: You can update an existing key-value pair in a dictionary using the assignment operator (=
Deleting dictionary elements: You can delete a key-value pair from a dictionary using the del keyword or pop
method.
Accessing: Use the key to access values (my_dict["key"]).
Adding: Add a new key-value pair by assignment (my_dict["new_key"] = value).
Updating: Update an existing key's value by assigning a new value (my_dict["key"] = new_value).
Deleting: Use del or pop() to remove key-value pairs.

3.Dictionary methods like keys(), values(), and items().
Here’s a simple explanation and Python program that demonstrates the use of keys(), values(), and items() methods in a dictionary.
1. keys() Method
The keys() method returns a view object that displays a list of all the keys in the dictionary.

2. values() Method
The values() method returns a view object that displays a list of all the values in the dictionary.

3. items() Method
The items() method returns a view object that displays a list of all the key-value pairs in the dictionary as tuples.

keys(): Returns the keys of the dictionary.
values(): Returns the values associated with each key in the dictionary.
items(): Returns both the keys and the values as key-value pairs in the form of tuples.

