1. What is a stored procedure in SQL, and how does it differ from a standard SQL query?

Stored Procedure in SQL:

A stored procedure is a precompiled collection of one or more SQL statements that are stored together in the database and can be executed as a single unit. It is essentially a set of SQL queries and commands that can be invoked by a name from the database.

Key Characteristics of a Stored Procedure:
Precompiled: Stored procedures are precompiled, meaning they are parsed and optimized by the database when they are created, not each time they are executed. This can improve performance because the database doesn’t need to re-parse and optimize the SQL each time.

Reusable: Once created, stored procedures can be reused multiple times by calling them with a simple command, which promotes reusability and maintainability.

Encapsulation: They encapsulate complex business logic, allowing it to be executed in the database rather than having it scattered across multiple application code files. This centralizes the logic and makes it easier to maintain.

Accept Parameters: Stored procedures can accept input parameters, and they can return output parameters or result sets. This makes them flexible for a variety of use cases.

Error Handling: Stored procedures can contain error-handling mechanisms using constructs like TRY-CATCH in SQL Server or EXCEPTION in PL/SQL (Oracle), which helps manage errors more efficiently.

Transaction Management: Stored procedures can handle transaction management by using COMMIT, ROLLBACK, and SAVEPOINT commands. This allows for better control over data consistency and integrity.

Stored Procedure Example:

CREATE PROCEDURE GetAvgSalaryByDepartment (IN dept_name VARCHAR(100))
BEGIN
    SELECT department, AVG(salary) AS avg_salary
    FROM employees
    WHERE department = dept_name
    GROUP BY department;
END;

Calling the Stored Procedure:

CALL GetAvgSalaryByDepartment('Sales');

Standard SQL Query Example:

SELECT department, AVG(salary) AS avg_salary
FROM employees
WHERE department = 'Sales'
GROUP BY department;

2. Explain the advantages of using stored procedures.

Advantages of Using Stored Procedures in SQL
Stored procedures offer several benefits over standard SQL queries and are a key component of many database systems. Here’s a detailed breakdown of the advantages of using stored procedures:

1. Improved Performance
Precompiled Execution: Stored procedures are precompiled and stored in the database. When they are first created, the SQL statements inside are parsed and optimized by the database engine. This eliminates the need for parsing and optimizing each SQL statement every time it's executed, which can significantly improve execution speed, especially for complex queries.
Reduced Network Traffic: Stored procedures can reduce the amount of data transferred between the client and server. Instead of sending multiple SQL queries over the network, the client only needs to call the stored procedure, which reduces network overhead.
2. Code Reusability
Centralized Logic: Once a stored procedure is created, it can be reused multiple times by different applications or parts of the same application. This promotes DRY (Don't Repeat Yourself) principles, ensuring the same logic doesn’t need to be re-implemented each time.
Easy Maintenance: If the business logic in a stored procedure needs to change, the modification only needs to be made in the stored procedure itself, rather than in every place where the SQL logic is repeated. This simplifies maintenance and reduces the risk of inconsistent behavior.
3. Security and Access Control
Granular Permissions: Stored procedures allow access control over the database by granting permissions on the procedure rather than directly on the tables. For example, a user can be granted the ability to execute a stored procedure without having direct access to the underlying data.
Data Hiding: Stored procedures can hide the complexity of the underlying database schema from users and applications. Users can call stored procedures to manipulate data, without knowing the exact structure of the database.
4. Enhanced Security
Minimized SQL Injection Risks: By using stored procedures, you can better safeguard against SQL injection attacks, as input parameters are passed to the stored procedure instead of being directly embedded in SQL queries. This way, user inputs are treated as values, not executable code, reducing the likelihood of malicious SQL injection.
5. Transaction Control
Automatic Transaction Management: Stored procedures can handle transaction control (e.g., using COMMIT, ROLLBACK, and SAVEPOINT) within the procedure. This ensures that a group of related SQL statements is treated as a single unit of work, maintaining data consistency even in the event of an error.
Atomic Operations: By grouping multiple SQL statements into a stored procedure, you ensure that the operations are atomic, meaning they either complete entirely or not at all. This helps preserve the integrity of the data.
6. Better Error Handling
Structured Error Handling: Stored procedures can include error-handling mechanisms (such as TRY-CATCH blocks in SQL Server or EXCEPTION in PL/SQL). This makes it easier to catch and manage errors, ensuring that the application gets useful feedback when something goes wrong.
Custom Error Messages: Stored procedures can return custom error messages, which helps in identifying the cause of failures and enables the application to handle errors more gracefully.
7. Consistency and Standardization
Centralized Business Logic: Business logic (e.g., calculations, validations, data transformations) can be centralized in stored procedures, ensuring consistency across applications. This helps standardize how certain operations are performed, ensuring that all applications accessing the database are using the same logic.
Easier to Debug: Since the stored procedure encapsulates the business logic, it's easier to debug issues that arise, as you can isolate the problem to the specific stored procedure instead of having to track down errors in scattered SQL queries across multiple parts of the application.
8. Reduced Application Code Complexity
Cleaner Application Code: By offloading complex SQL logic and business rules to the database in the form of stored procedures, you can simplify the application code. This leads to clearer, more maintainable, and less error-prone application code.
Consistency Across Applications: Multiple applications (e.g., web apps, mobile apps, or reporting tools) can use the same stored procedures for data manipulation. This ensures that business logic is consistent across all applications that interact with the database.
9. Better Scalability
Optimized for High Traffic: Stored procedures are designed to handle large volumes of data and complex operations efficiently. When properly designed, stored procedures can scale well as database traffic increases, since the database engine can optimize execution and caching for repeated operations.
10. Reduces Client-side Logic
Offloading Logic to the Database: When complex operations are encapsulated within stored procedures, less logic needs to be written in the client application. This offloads work from the client, which is typically beneficial for performance and reduces the chances of introducing errors in the client code.
11. Simplified Data Access
Fewer SQL Queries: Stored procedures can abstract complex multi-step operations into a single call, making it easier for applications to perform complex tasks without needing to send multiple SQL queries. This simplifies data access for application developers.
12. Version Control and Testing
Version Control: Storing business logic in the database as stored procedures makes it easier to manage versions of your logic. For example, you can create different versions of stored procedures for development, testing, and production environments, and have them controlled through version management systems.
Easier Testing: Testing stored procedures separately from application code allows for easier debugging and ensures that the logic works as expected in isolation before integrating it with the application.
