1. What is a view in SQL, and how is it different from a table?

A view in SQL is a virtual table that represents the result of a query. It is essentially a stored SELECT statement that you can reference like a table, but unlike a table, it does not store data itself. Instead, a view dynamically fetches data from the underlying tables each time it is accessed.

Key Differences Between a View and a Table:
Data Storage:

Table: A table is a physical structure in a database that stores actual data.
View: A view does not store data. It is a saved query that gets executed whenever the view is accessed.
Data Definition:

Table: A table has a permanent, defined schema with columns and data types.
View: A view is based on a query and can display data from one or more tables or even other views. Its schema depends on the result set of the query it encapsulates.
Modifiability:

Table: You can insert, update, delete, and modify data directly in a table.
View: You generally cannot insert, update, or delete data directly in a view (though there are exceptions if the view is simple and meets certain criteria). Instead, views are usually used for querying or simplifying complex operations.
Performance:

Table: Accessing data in a table is typically faster since the data is physically stored in the database.
View: A view can potentially slow down performance, as it is essentially a query that needs to be executed every time it is accessed. Complex views or those based on large tables may have more performance overhead.
Use Cases:

Table: Used for storing and organizing raw data in the database.
View: Used to simplify complex queries, abstract data access, provide a layer of security (by restricting access to certain columns or rows), or present data in a specific format.
Example:
Table:


CREATE TABLE Employees (
    employee_id INT,
    first_name VARCHAR(50),
    last_name VARCHAR(50),
    department VARCHAR(50)
);
View:


CREATE VIEW EmployeeDetails AS
SELECT first_name, last_name, department
FROM Employees
WHERE department = 'Sales';
In this example, the EmployeeDetails view provides a simplified view of the Employees table that only shows employees in the "Sales" department.

2. Explain the advantages of using views in SQL databases.

Using views in SQL databases offers several advantages, which can improve data management, security, and ease of use. Below are the key benefits of using views:

1. Simplified Complex Queries
Abstraction of Complexity: Views can encapsulate complex SQL queries, making it easier for users to access the data without needing to know the underlying table structures or how to write complex joins, aggregations, or filtering.
Example: Instead of repeatedly writing complex joins between multiple tables, a view can be created to simplify the querying process.
Benefit: Users can simply query the view, like a table, without dealing with the complexities of the underlying query logic.
2. Data Security
Access Control: Views allow you to restrict access to sensitive data. For example, a view can display only specific columns or rows from a table, such as hiding a column with personal information or restricting data to a specific region or department.
Role-based Restrictions: You can create views that limit access to certain parts of the data for different users, improving security by enforcing data visibility policies without altering the underlying table structure.
Example: If an employee table contains sensitive columns like salary, a view can exclude this column while allowing access to other non-sensitive columns like name and department.
3. Data Independence
Decouples Users from Changes in Schema: Views provide a layer of abstraction between users and the physical database schema. This means that you can change the underlying table structure (like adding or removing columns) without affecting the users’ access to data through views, as long as the view itself is not altered.
Benefit: Users can continue querying the same view even if the underlying tables are modified, reducing the impact of schema changes on application code or user queries.
4. Reusability
Reuse of Complex Queries: Once a view is defined, it can be reused across different parts of an application or by multiple users without having to write the same query repeatedly.
Example: A view that calculates the total sales by region can be reused in different reports without needing to write the same aggregate query each time.
5. Improved Performance (in some cases)
Materialized Views: While standard views are not stored in the database and are computed on the fly, materialized views (or indexed views) store the results of the query physically. This can improve performance for frequently accessed data because the database doesn't need to re-execute the query each time the view is accessed.
Benefit: Materialized views can be especially useful when querying large datasets or performing complex aggregations.
6. Logical Data Representation
Presenting Data in a Different Format: Views can present data in a way that makes more sense to users or applications. For example, a view can join multiple tables and present them in a user-friendly way, providing a "logical" structure rather than showing raw data from different tables.
Example: Combining customer and order information into a single view can make it easier for salespeople to access customer order details without having to know the table structure.
7. Easier Maintenance and Management
Simplifies Query Maintenance: If a complex query needs to be updated or fixed, you only need to update the view rather than modifying every query that uses it across the system. This centralizes changes to the query logic.
Example: If a business rule changes, such as the way discounts are calculated, updating the view will automatically reflect the change in all reports and queries that depend on it.
8. Data Aggregation
Pre-aggregated Data: Views can perform aggregation (e.g., summing, averaging, or counting) over raw data and present the results as if they were just part of the table, making it easier to work with summary data without recalculating it each time.
Example: A view that calculates monthly sales totals by region can provide a simplified interface for querying aggregated data.
9. Encapsulation of Business Logic
Embed Business Rules: Views can be used to encapsulate business logic, such as filters or calculations, making the logic reusable and easier to manage.
Example: A view could enforce a rule that only returns products with inventory above a certain threshold, allowing all users to access this rule through the view without needing to apply it in every query.
10. Better Reporting
Consistent Data for Reporting: When using views for reporting, you can ensure that the data is consistent across different reports, as the view encapsulates a standard way of retrieving the data, rather than allowing each report to define its own method.
Benefit: Ensures that reports are based on the same logic and data sources, improving consistency and accuracy.
