1. What is the SELECT statement, and how is it used to query data?

The SELECT statement is the most commonly used SQL (Structured Query Language) command to retrieve data from one or more tables in a database. 
It allows you to specify which columns of data you want to retrieve, from which table(s), and under what conditions.
Basic Syntax of the SELECT Statement
SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name
WHERE condition;
Key Components:
SELECT: This keyword starts the query and is followed by the columns you want to retrieve. You can list specific columns or use * to select all columns.
FROM: This keyword specifies the table from which you want to retrieve the data.
WHERE (optional): This clause allows you to filter the rows based on a condition. Without WHERE, all rows from the table will be returned.
ORDER BY (optional): You can use this to sort the results based on one or more columns.
LIMIT (optional, in some databases): This clause limits the number of rows returned.
Examples of Using the SELECT Statement:
1. Selecting All Columns:
To select all columns from the students table:

SELECT * FROM students;
The * means "all columns," so this will return every column in the students table.
2. Selecting Specific Columns:
To select only the first_name and last_name columns from the students table:

SELECT first_name, last_name FROM students;
This retrieves just the specified columns.
3. Using WHERE to Filter Results:
To select students who have a grade of "A":

SELECT DISTINCT department FROM students;
This query returns all unique departments from the students table.

2. Explain the use of the ORDER BY and WHERE clauses in SQL queries.

In SQL, both the ORDER BY and WHERE clauses are used to refine and control the results of a query, but they serve different purposes. Here's an explanation of each clause and how they work:

1. WHERE Clause
The WHERE clause is used to filter rows based on specific conditions. It restricts the records returned by a query, ensuring that only the rows that meet the specified condition(s) are included in the result set.

Syntax:
SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name
WHERE condition;
Key Points:
The WHERE clause is placed after the FROM clause and before the ORDER BY clause (if used).
It allows for conditions that can compare values using operators like =, <, >, <=, >=, <> (not equal), BETWEEN, LIKE, IN, etc.
You can combine multiple conditions using AND, OR, and NOT to build complex filters.
2. ORDER BY Clause
The ORDER BY clause is used to sort the result set based on one or more columns. 
It controls the order in which the rows are displayed, either in ascending (ASC) or descending (DESC) order.
Syntax:
SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name
ORDER BY column1 [ASC | DESC], column2 [ASC | DESC], ...;
The ORDER BY clause is placed after the WHERE clause (if present) and any other clauses like GROUP BY.
By default, the ORDER BY clause sorts the results in ascending order (ASC). If you want the results in descending order, you use DESC.
You can order by one or more columns, and if multiple columns are specified, the result will first be sorted by the first column, then by the second column, and so on.
The WHERE clause filters the data, selecting only the rows that meet specific conditions.
The ORDER BY clause then sorts the result set based on one or more columns, after the filtering has been applied.